design spec for version property in project reference (#12348)
NuGet/Home: proposed/2023/allow-version-property-in-projectreference.md

# Allow users to define version ranges for ProjectReferences

- [Martin Ruiz](https://github.com/martinrrm)
- Start Date (2023-01-01)
- [5556](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/5556)

# Summary

Add a `Version` to `ProjectReference` tag in CSPROJ, to allow customers to specify the referenced project version in the `.nupkg` and `nuspec` files when doing a pack command.

# Motivation

> When using `ProjectReference` there is no option to define a Version to the reference like in `PackageReference` and the version will always be defined as `>= ProjectVersion`, this results in customers manually modifying the nuspec file if they want to declare a different version than the project version.

Reviewer: Could you be able to add little bit more details on exactly what is the project version here?
What happens if I change different branch which have same version but with different content? 
For packages we have dedicated global packages and for same `id+version` content doesn't mutate. Here it mutates, so what happens now for same project version with different content?

Author: For project version I mean the value of `<Version></Version>` in the CSPROJ. 

About `what happens now for same project version with different content?` I'll do more testing but I;m not sure if I understand your concern.

For example if ProjectA has a `ProjectReference` to `MyReferencedProject` like this: `<ProjectReference Include="MyReferencedProject" Version="[9.0.0, 13.0.2)"  /> ` and you change the content in MyReferencedProject but not the version, you mean the package content should not change?

# Explanation

Currently when adding a `ProjectReference` to a project, there is no property to specify which version(s) of it to be used when doing a pack. 

> When doing a pack to a package with a `ProjectRefernce` it will always be added as a range, where the minumum version will be the ProjectReference version and with an open maximum version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When doing a pack to a package with a `ProjectReference` it will always be added as a range, where the minimum version will be the ProjectReference version and with an open maximum version.
```

```
<ItemGroup>
    <ProjectReference Include="../MyReferencedPackage/MyReferencedPackage.csproj" />
</ItemGroup>
```

Add a `Version` property to `ProjectReference` and store that value in the assets file when doing a restore so we can retrieve that information when doing a `pack command.

If there is no `Version` information then the behavior should be the current one.

## Example

### .CSPROJ file
```
<ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Newtonsoft.Json" Version="[9.0.0, 13.0.2)" />

>     <ProjectReference Include="../MyReferencedPackage/MyReferencedPackage.csproj" Version="[1.0.0, 2.0.0)" />

Reviewer 2: I think the minimum version should not be allowed to be specified on the ProjectReference, and NuGet should always automatically fill in the min version from the project's version.

This might not be popular with customers who want this feature, but this is for the protection of package consumers, especially since NuGet only selected minimum version in its dependency resolution graph.

Author: With this I think we can take the customer suggestion and do something like this:

```
<ProjectReference Include="..\MyReferencedPackage\MyReferencedPackage.csproj" >
    <MaximumVersion Inclusive="false">2</MaximumVersion>
</ProjectReference>
```

With this in mind, you think saving this as a version range in the assets file (like the initial proposal) or change it to be different properties?

Option 1 (I like this one more) :
```
"C:\\Users\\mruizmares\\source\\repos\\ConsoleApp1\\MyReferencedPackage\\MyReferencedPackage.csproj": {
  "projectPath": "C:\\Users\\mruizmares\\source\\repos\\ConsoleApp1\\MyReferencedPackage\\MyReferencedPackage.csproj",
  "version": "[1.0.0, 2.0.0)"
}
```

Option 2:
```
"C:\\Users\\mruizmares\\source\\repos\\ConsoleApp1\\MyReferencedPackage\\MyReferencedPackage.csproj": {
  "projectPath": "C:\\Users\\mruizmares\\source\\repos\\ConsoleApp1\\MyReferencedPackage\\MyReferencedPackage.csproj",
  "maxVersion": "2.0.0",
  "inclusive": true,
}
```

I currently have an mvp for this in branch `dev-martinrrm-project-reference` I have also tested with `dotnet build --no-restore` and it works, I'm going to investigate why is not breaking.

Reviewer 2: Apparently I forgot to reply to this 😕 

> With this I think we can take the customer suggestion and do something like this:
> `<MaximumVersion Inclusive="false">2</MaximumVersion>`

That's not valid MSBuild syntax. While project files are XML, MSBuild has a strict syntax, and diverging from it will require changes to MSBuild if we feel stongly enough that it's needed to support a customer scenario (in which case you'd also need to consider what potential bugs it could introduce to non-NuGet scenarios if the syntax was extended). Anyway, MSBuild items are basically `Dictionary<string, string>`, where using XML attributes and child elements are equivalent. So any syntax proposal needs to be key-value pairs.

NuGet's `VersionRange` already supports values without a minimum value, for example `(, 2.0.0-0)`, so we could just have `<ProjectReference Include="..\path\to\project.csproj" Version="(,2.0.0)" />`, and then at pack time, NuGet figures out the actual version of `project.csproj`, let's say 1.2.3, and then makes it a `[1.2.3, 2.0.0)` dependency.

However, I think another scenario that some customers may want, is to limit the package dependency to the exact version of the project when it's being packed. VersionRange defines this as `[1.2.3]` (which is equivalent to `[1.2.3, 1.2.3]`). However, `[]` is not valid, neither is `[,]`. I don't currently have any ideas for syntax we can use, unless we special case `[]` in the relevant code before it gets passed to `VersionRange.Parse`.

Author: @zivkan I like the idea of doing `<ProjectReference Include="..\path\to\project.csproj" Version="(,2.0.0)" />` and change the version range to always have the lower version to the project version, just like your example. But at the same time I'm concern that this will only work if they are using ranges, otherwise it will look weird, for example:

`<ProjectReference Include="..\path\to\project.csproj" Version="2.0.0" />` make it a `[1.2.3, 2.0.0)` or `[1.2.3, 2.0.0]`.

What if we do something like `<ProjectReference Include="..\path\to\project.csproj" MaxVersion="2.0.0" Inclusive="true" />`? Is that a valid MSBuild syntax? Whit this we can also make the scenario for `[1.2.3,1.2.3]` work.

Reviewer 2: As per [our docs on version ranges](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/nuget/concepts/package-versioning#version-ranges), `Version="2.0.0"` means `Version="[2.0.0, )"` (>= 2.0).  My proposal here is that any version range with a min version errors our, so `Version="2.0.0"` would result in an error.  (maybe I forgot to write this explicitly in my previous comment?)

> What if we do something like `<ProjectReference Include="..\path\to\project.csproj" MaxVersion="2.0.0" Inclusive="true" />`?  Is that a valid MSBuild syntax?

Yes, that works with MSBuild's syntax. Something to keep in mind, although it's very unlikely, is that customers might have build custom build scripts, so if any customer already uses `Inclusive=` or `MaxVersion=` for something in their build script, introducing this might break them. `Inclusive` in particular sounds version generic, so if you're not already in the mental context of thinking about NuGet dependency versions, I don't think that `Inclusive` would be obvious to customers what it's related to. Imagine being a new .NET dev, looking at a csproj for a project you just joined, and trying to guess what `<ProjectReference Include="..\projb\projb.csproj" MaxVersion="2.0.0" Inclusive="true" />` means. The `MaxVersion` might help with the guess about `Inclusive`. Also, what happens if `Inclusive` has a value, but `MaxVersion` does not? Do we silently ignore, print a warning or an error? This is also an additional edge case that needs tests (and ideally should be covered by the spec). I think using `Version=` with a range, and erroring out when a min version is specified, has few test cases, although we shouldn't be designing for that. What's easiest for customers to understand and work with?

Customers are more likely to already be familiar with `Version=` for PackageReference, although I imagine not many customers are familiar with NuGet's range syntax. Maven uses the same syntax, but I'm not aware of other package managers using this syntax. I think this syntax is used in mathematics, but not many people have studied maths to the extend to have learned this syntax, and even if they have, who will expect these math conventions to be used in a project file?

All this to say, I don't have an obvious answer/solution. Get more feedback from others. Perhaps my `Version="range"` suggestion is not popular. I'm mostly thinking out loud, hoping that something will jump out as an "obvious" best choice, but it hasn't.

> Whit this we can also make the scenario for `[1.2.3,1.2.3]` work.

How? What would the syntax be for "use the referenced project's version as the max" be? `MaxVersion="???"`. It can't be `$(Version)`, because that's the version of the current project, not the referenced project. Although, I expect the most common scenario for wanting to use exact version match is when there are multiple projects packed into packages that all use the same version, in which case `$(Version)` will work from a pragmatic point of view.

Reviewer 3: magic word maybe?

`[X,1.2.3]` where X is the autofilled version?
Likewise, `[X]`.

Reviewer 3: Today, the `Version` for project references get recalculated when pack is run, so maybe that's another argument for some sort of a magic word/letter. 

I don't love it though. It feels like the most completely way without misuse risk, but it's kind of ugly.

</ItemGroup>
```

### assets file
```
"frameworks": {
    "net6.0": {
        "targetAlias": "net6.0",
        "projectReferences": {
            "C:\\Users\\mruizmares\\source\\repos\\ConsoleApp1\\MyReferencedPackage\\MyReferencedPackage.csproj": {
                "projectPath": "C:\\Users\\mruizmares\\source\\repos\\ConsoleApp1\\MyReferencedPackage\\MyReferencedPackage.csproj",

>                 "version": "[1.0.0, 2.0.0)"

Reviewer 4: Will this change be compatible with old version tools?
That is, will old tool be able to build the solution/project with the new format assets file?
You may refer to https://github.com/NuGet/NuGet.Client/pull/4654#discussion_r891833840 for similar checking.

Author: Tested doing a `dotnet build` and it works, you know if there are more ways to test if it is compatible?

Reviewer 2: Did you use `--no-restore`? Otherwise `dotnet build` will auto-restore and overwrite your manually edited assets file.

Reviewer 3: My guess is that because it's additive it should work.

            }
        }
    }
},
```

### nuspec file
```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<package xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/packaging/2012/06/nuspec.xsd">
  <metadata>
    <id>ConsoleApp1</id>
    <version>1.2.4</version>
    <authors>ConsoleApp1</authors>
    <description>Package Description</description>
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework="net6.0">
        <dependency id="MyReferencedPackage" version="[1.0.0, 2.0.0)" exclude="Build,Analyzers" />

>         <dependency id="Newtonsoft.Json" version="[9.0.0, 13.0.2)" exclude="Build,Analyzers" />

Reviewer 4: May I know if there is any behavior change for package reference? Or will this change only impact project reference? Thanks!

Author: Right now, we consider ProjectReferences as packages when doing pack, so this code is shared. Since PackageReference's can handle ranges, I think the behavior is going to be the same. 

Currently we use `dependency.VersionRange.ToLegacyShortString()` to represent the version string value and I want to investigate if we can use `dependency.VersionRange.ToShortString()` or if it's a breaking change

Reviewer 3: Why do we need to switch from legacy short string to short string?

# Allow users to define version ranges for ProjectReferences

- [Martin Ruiz](https://github.com/martinrrm)
- Start Date (2023-01-01)
- [5556](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/5556)

# Summary

> Add a `Version` to `ProjectReference` tag in CSPROJ, to allow customers to specify the referenced project version in the `.nupkg` and `nuspec` files when doing a pack command.

Reviewer 5: For some reason, I think `Version` attribute doesn't belong to `ProjectReference` because it refers to the package version range. Looking at the schema for `ProjectReference` element https://github.com/dotnet/msbuild/blob/main/src/MSBuild/MSBuild/Microsoft.Build.CommonTypes.xsd#L643-L722, I think `PackageVersion` might be more appropriate. The schema has `Package` as sub element for `ProjectReference` but there are no comments to understand more about its usage. I noticed that there is also `SpecificVersion` attribute for `ProjectReference` element to specify whether the exact version of the assembly should be used.

Reviewer 5: FYI - There is an MSBuild property `PackageVersion` allowing customers to specify package version in the csproj file if the project is packed as nupkg.

https://learn.microsoft.com/nuget/create-packages/package-authoring-best-practices#package-metadata

Visual Studio property name | Project file/ MSBuild property name | Nuspec property name | Description
-- | -- | -- | --
Package version | PackageVersion | version | NuGet package version.

> Add a `Version` to `ProjectReference` tag in CSPROJ, to allow customers to specify the referenced project version in the `.nupkg` and `nuspec` files when doing a pack command.

Reviewer 5: How about adding another `PackageReference` entry in the project file when customers would like to specify upper limit version number for a project reference.

As you can see in the below example, `ClassLibrary2` is mentioned as both `ProjectReference` and `PacakageReference`.

```csproj
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>net7.0</TargetFramework>
    <ImplicitUsings>enable</ImplicitUsings>
    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="ClassLibrary2" Version="[1.0.0, 2.0.0)" />
  </ItemGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <ProjectReference Include="..\ClassLibrary2\ClassLibrary2.csproj" />
  </ItemGroup>

</Project>
```

I didn't think about the pros/cons or possibilities of this approach.

# Explanation

Currently when adding a `ProjectReference` to a project, there is no property to specify which version(s) of it to be used when doing a pack. 
When doing a pack to a package with a `ProjectReference` it will always be added as a range, where the minimum version will be the ProjectReference version and with an open maximum version.

```
<ItemGroup>
    <ProjectReference Include="../MyReferencedPackage/MyReferencedPackage.csproj" />
</ItemGroup>
```

Add a `Version` property to `ProjectReference` and store that value in the assets file when doing a restore so we can retrieve that information when doing a `pack` command.

## Considerations

If there is no `Version` information then the behavior should be the current one.

If the `Version` is not a range, it will be treated as one, like in `PackageReference`. `Version="2.0.0"` means `Version="[2.0.0, )"`

Minimum version should not be open to users, and NuGet should always automatically fill in the min version from the project's version, this is for the protection of package consumers.

---

> ## Option 1 - Version with VersionRange

Author: After doing more investigation (Nikolche also commented about this in https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/12348#discussion_r1093686116), I think this option is not possible. 

I don't think we are aware of the project version during restore, meaning that we will have different information in the assets file and the .nupkg

Example:

MyReferencedPackage -> v.1.0.9

    <ProjectReference Include="../MyReferencedPackage/MyReferencedPackage.csproj" Version="[2.0.0, 4.0.0)" />

Will write this the assets file:
```
"net6.0": {
          "targetAlias": "net6.0",
          "projectReferences": {
            "C:\\Users\\mruizmares\\source\\repos\\ConsoleApp1\\MyReferencedPackage\\MyReferencedPackage.csproj": {
              "projectPath": "C:\\Users\\mruizmares\\source\\repos\\ConsoleApp1\\MyReferencedPackage\\MyReferencedPackage.csproj",
              "version": "[2.0.0, 4.0.0)"
            }
          }
```

And this can cause confusion when pack resolves to another min version.
